The chest radiograph is one of the most com-
monly obtained examinations in pediatric imag-
ing. It is also the examination most likely to be
encountered by radiology residents, pediatric
residents, general radiologists, and pediatricians.
Therefore, topics such as chest imaging in neo-
nates and the evaluation of suspected pneumo-
nia are discussed in detail.
Causes of respiratory distress in newborn infants
can be divided into those that are secondary to
diffuse pulmonary disease (medical causes) and
those that are secondary to a space-occupying
mass compressing the pulmonary parenchyma
(surgical causes).
Diffuse pulmonary disease causes respiratory
distress much more commonly than surgical dis-
eases, particularly in premature infants, who
make up the majority of cases of respiratory dis-
tress in the newborn. A simple way to evaluate
these patients and try to offer a limited differen-
tial diagnosis is to evaluate the lung volumes and
to characterize the pulmonary opacities.
Lung volumes can be categorized as high,
normal, or low. Normally, the apex of the dome
of the diaphragm is expected to be at the level of
approximately the tenth posterior rib. Lung opa-
city, if present, can be characterized as streaky,
perihilar (central) densities that have a linear
quality or as diffuse, granular opacities that
have an almost sandlike character. Classically,
cases fall into one of the following two cate-
gories: (1) cases with high lung volumes and
streaky perihilar densities and (2) cases with
low lung volumes and granular opacities
(Table 3-1). This is more of a guideline, rather
than a rule, because many neonates with diffuse
pulmonary disease have normal lung volumes.
The differential diagnosis for cases with high
lung volumes and streaky perihilar densities
includes meconium aspiration, transient tachyp-
nea of the newborn, and neonatal pneumonia.
Most of the neonates in this group are term. The
differential for cases with low lung volumes and
granular opacities includes surfactant deficiency
and -hemolytic streptococcal pneumonia. Most
of these neonates are premature.
Meconium aspiration syndrome results from
intrapartum or intrauterine aspiration of meconi-
um. It usually occurs secondary to stress, such as
hypoxia, and more often occurs in term or post-
mature neonates. The aspirated meconium
causes both obstruction of small airways sec-
ondary to its tenacious nature and also chemical
pneumonitis. The degree of respiratory failure
can be severe. Radiographic findings include
hyperinflation (high lung volumes), which may
be asymmetric and patchy, and asymmetric
lung densities that tend to have a ropy appear-
ance and a perihilar distribution (Fig. 3-1).
Commonly there are areas of hyperinflation
alternating with areas of atelectasis. Pleural effu-
sions can be present. Because of the small-
airway obstruction by the meconium, air-block
complications are common, with pneumothorax
occurring in 20% to 40% of cases. Meconium
aspiration syndrome is relatively common;
25,000 to 30,000 cases occur in the United
States annually.
Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) is
also referred to by a variety of other names,
including wet lung disease and transient respira-
tory distress. It occurs secondary to delayed
clearance of fetal lung fluid. Physiologically,
the clearing of fetal lung fluid is facilitated by
the ‘‘thoracic squeeze’’ during vaginal deliveries;
therefore, most cases of TTN are related to
