The chest radiograph is one of the most com monly obtained examinations in pediatric imag ing.
It is also the examination most likely to b encountered by radiology residents, pediatri residents, general radiologists, and pediatricians Therefore, topics such as chest imaging in neo nates and the evaluation of suspected pneumo nia are discussed in detail Causes of respiratory distress in newborn infant can be divided into those that are secondary t diffuse pulmonary disease (medical causes) an those that are secondary to a space-occupyin mass compressing the pulmonary parenchym (surgical causes) Diffuse pulmonary disease causes respirator distress much more commonly than surgical dis eases, particularly in premature infants, wh make up the majority of cases of respiratory dis tress in the newborn.
A simple way to evaluat these patients and try to offer a limited differen tial diagnosis is to evaluate the lung volumes an to characterize the pulmonary opacities Lung volumes can be categorized as high normal, or low.
Normally, the apex of the dom of the diaphragm is expected to be at the level o approximately the tenth posterior rib.
Lung opa city, if present, can be characterized as streaky perihilar (central) densities that have a linea quality or as diffuse, granular opacities tha have an almost sandlike character.
Classically cases fall into one of the following two cate gories: (1) cases with high lung volumes an streaky perihilar densities and (2) cases wit low lung volumes and granular opacitie (Table 3-1).
This is more of a guideline, rathe than a rule, because many neonates with diffus pulmonary disease have normal lung volumes The differential diagnosis for cases with hig lung volumes and streaky perihilar densitie includes meconium aspiration, transient tachyp nea of the newborn, and neonatal pneumonia Most of the neonates in this group are term.
Th differential for cases with low lung volumes an granular opacities includes surfactant deficienc and -hemolytic streptococcal pneumonia.
Mos of these neonates are premature Meconium aspiration syndrome results fro intrapartum or intrauterine aspiration of meconi um.
It usually occurs secondary to stress, such a hypoxia, and more often occurs in term or post mature neonates.
The aspirated meconiu causes both obstruction of small airways sec ondary to its tenacious nature and also chemica pneumonitis.
The degree of respiratory failur can be severe.
Radiographic findings includ hyperinflation (high lung volumes), which ma be asymmetric and patchy, and asymmetri lung densities that tend to have a ropy appear ance and a perihilar distribution  Commonly there are areas of hyperinflatio alternating with areas of atelectasis.
Pleural effu sions can be present.
Because of the small airway obstruction by the meconium, air-bloc complications are common, with pneumothora occurring in 20% to 40% of cases.
Meconiu aspiration syndrome is relatively common 25,000 to 30,000 cases occur in the Unite States annually Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) i also referred to by a variety of other names including wet lung disease and transient respira tory distress.
It occurs secondary to delaye clearance of fetal lung fluid.
Physiologically the clearing of fetal lung fluid is facilitated b the ‘‘thoracic squeeze’’ during vaginal deliveries therefore, most cases of TTN are related t 